All right, next up, we're going to get into some really good stuff.
So remember in when we were learning about text, we had a number of lessons where we dug into a lot
of the text manipulation methods on the string class.
Well, there is something kind of equivalent to that in math, and it's where a lot of the really good
math functions exist.
So there is a class called math, and this class has a huge number of utility methods, as I call them
static methods that are there for doing all of the rest of the typical math that you would see on a
scientific calculator or something like that.
And so we're going to step through a lot of the most common methods on this class so that you can see
how to use them and how to get real math things done.
All right.
So what I'm going to do is just literally just walk through this and I'll start kind of at the top and
I won't hit every single method.
Some of the methods I don't even know how to use because I just don't need them, but I will hit the
most obvious and commonly used ones.
All right, so first up is the ABS method, which stands for absolute.
So this method gives you the absolute value of a number.
So let's see how to use it.
So what I will do here is I will do a sizzle and then we'll call math dot abs.
And so what we can do is pass in a negative number here.
OK, so if we pass in a negative number, this is going to give us the absolute value.
I'm hoping that everyone who's taking this course at least has had pre-algebra.
So you should probably know what an absolute value is.
But the absolute value of a number is basically just taking that number and stripping off any negative
on it.
OK.
So the absolute value of the negative five should be positive five or just five.
So let's see that real quick.
We'll run this.
There you go.
So negative five becomes positive.
Five.
So pretty straightforward.
Nothing real crazy there.
I think there are a couple of versions of this method.
Yeah, so there's one for many of the common types and long float and double.
OK.
But I don't think you need to run each of those.
All right.
So that's absolute value.
Next up, let's see.
I'm not going to demonstrate every single method, as I said before, but I may speak to a few of them.
Like this one here, a C.O.s.
That's a trigonometric function.
I believe the A is for arc cosine.
I'm not going to run that.
The ceiling function is an interesting one.
So first, I will just demonstrate it with a few different values and then we'll talk about it.
So let's say we had a five point zero and I'm going to duplicate this a couple of times and a five point
five.
Well, actually this to a five point four and then a five point six.
And let's print that all of this out and see what we end up with.
OK.
OK, so as we can see here, we got 5.0, 6.0 and 6.0.
So this may require a little bit of explanation, but it's not that complicated.
This function mostly wants to round up, typically wants to round up to an integer.
OK, now if you're already on an even integer like 5.0, then it's not going to do anything at all.
But anything even infinitesimally larger than 5.0, such as 5.1 or 5.4.
It's going to round that up to the next highest integer, which is six.
OK.
So it's called ceiling, because if you think of this as the set point for 5.0 and 6.0 is here, it's
anything greater than 5.0, such as five point zero one.
It's going to round up to the ceiling, which will be six.
So let's also let's try five point zero one and just confirm that.
Yes.
So see it even rounded up five point zero one to six point, oh, OK.
So that's what the ceiling function does.
And since we're on the ceiling function, we might as well look at the floor function, which is pretty
much the same thing.
So what I will do is I will switch into my column selection mode here and then I will select all of
those ceiling functions and I will just change it all to floor.
Just like that.
OK, so now let's run.
Hold on a minute, and I think I'll change these values a bit.
Let's do five point 9-9-9.
And let's do.
Yeah, that's fine.
Let's let's do this.
OK.
So as you can see, everything ends up being 5.00 in this case, so it wants to go down to the floor.
So again, if this is five point, oh, and this is six point, oh, anything that is less than 6.0
and greater than or equal to 5.0 is going to end up becoming 5.0.
OK.
I hope that's fairly obvious how that's working.
All right.
Let's see.
Let's clear out these extra two, and let's go back in here and look at the other methods.
Oops.
All right, let's take a look at the MEN function, and this is pretty straightforward.
So the way this would be used in a real program is that you might have a program that takes some input.
So at the time of the writing of the code, you may not know what the input might be, but let's but
it will be stored in some variables.
So let's say you've got two variables number one, number one equals.
Three and numb to equals five.
All right.
And then so the MEN function takes two numbers, so I will pass it and I'm one and a numb to it will
it will return whichever number is the smaller one, the minimum one?
OK.
That's what it will return.
So if we run this, there we go.
So return to three.
Like I said, a situation where you might want to use this would be one in which you're taking some
input and you always want to just go with the smaller input.
But at the time, when you're writing the code, you won't know which input is smaller, right?
Because you don't know what the user is going to enter.
So then you'd use a function like this to make that determination.
All right.
And so then there's an opposite of this, which is a max and we can use it just like this.
So now if we run this now it returns the five, right?
It's giving us the larger value and same type of scenario here.
All right.
Moving on, let's look at the power method.
And this is pretty straightforward.
If you want to raise a number to a certain power like two to the third power, for example, you would
use this, I guess for this, I won't use the variables we'll just use.
OK, so two to the third power will run that that should be eight.
There you go.
Now notice it returned 8.0, and that's because this method is actually storing these values in doubles
and therefore it's going to return a double as well.
OK, but pretty straightforward.
Next up is the random function, and this is an extremely useful function.
So any time we need to do something random in a program, there are a couple of ways to do this.
Built in two Java and this is one of them.
And then there's a more robust way.
The difference between this way and the more robust way is that this random function is considered to
be pseudo random, believe it or not.
Quick little minor side note Believe it or not, computers actually are not good at generating random
numbers at all.
And when you think about it, it should kind of make sense, because how can a computer generate anything
random, you know, it requires?
There's a whole entire line of thinking, in fact, to engineer computers to be able to generate a good
set of truly random numbers.
And so this particular function isn't all that great at it.
It's just a good approximation for simple things.
It's like if you're going to make a really simple card game or something, this random function might
be fine.
But if you were going to do something like writing some type of security related code that needs to
generate large ciphers and do a lot of randomness that way, you would not want to use this random function
for something as important as that.
All right.
So anyway, let's see how this works, and then I'll explain.
I'll explain a little bit about it.
So we'll run this.
All right.
Look at what that returned.
Point seven six five.
Blah blah, blah, blah blah.
But that's not what you were expecting.
Let's do this.
Also, let's run it a few times.
Let's generate a few random numbers in a row, OK, and just see what we end up with.
OK, so we've got a few random numbers point five, seven point five, four point seven point four point
six and point one.
Let's run it one more time and just see what we get.
So we got two point five seven four six 11.
OK, so at least we are getting different sets of random numbers for two consecutive runs and, you
know, so that's that's not nothing that's that's good.
OK, so let me now delete the X, the extra calls here and now let's talk about how to use this in a
useful way, because almost nobody who ever wants to generate a random number wants to get these like
decimal numbers and stuff.
So let's say we were going to write a guessing game, and the game can pick a number between zero and
10, I guess.
OK.
So what we would need to do is a little bit of math here.
Just a tiny bit.
Nothing scary, basically, to use this random function in a useful way.
You need to multiply its output times whatever your upper range is.
So if we're wanting numbers between zero and 10, then we need to multiply times.
10.
Now you're never going to actually get the value of 10 out of this, the highest it can go is going
to be something less than 10 write like a nine point, whatever.
That's by virtue of the fact that this function will never return 1.0.
It will always return something greater than zero and less than one.
OK.
So let's run this.
And see what we end up with.
OK, so we got seven point one.
Now, what if you didn't want these fractional components here, right?
And you just wanted nice integers?
Can you think of a way that you could force the output here to just give you a nice, simple integers?
Take a moment.
Pause the video if you need to to think about it, and then let's let's figure that out.
OK, so if you will recall in one of the previous lessons, I showed you how we can tell Java to force
a number to become a different type.
So in other words, if it was an integer, we can force it to be a double or a float.
Well, we can also force in this case what is a double to become a and an integer.
And the way we can do that is.
To simply wrap.
This whole thing.
And then cast it to an integer just like that.
So if we run this now?
Cool.
Now we get an eight, and so if we run this a few times, just to make sure.
All right, so there we go.
Now we're getting nice hole numbers now notice, because we are casting the results of this bit to integer.
We're now able to get zero.
So the math, the random function itself will never return to zero.
It will always return values greater than zero.
However, it is possible for values that are less than one to two become a zero when they are cast to
an integer.
So you get your zeros there.
All right.
Let's look at some more functions.
OK, next up, we'll take a look at let's see.
We'll take a look at math round and this does what you probably are guessing it does.
It rounds numbers.
So let's take a look at a few examples here.
We'll do five point o and I'm going to duplicate this a few times and let's do five nine two three four
five five seven eight nine nine nine.
All right.
Let's run this and see what we get.
OK, so for the first three, we get five, five point zero, five point two and five point four.
I think that makes sense.
If you recall back to your elementary school lessons when you probably learned about rounding in the
first place, most likely the teacher told you between two integers, such as five and six when you
get to five point five.
Then you round up, right?
And that's pretty much what this is doing right here.
So from 5.0, two and four, we go down.
But once we get to the halfway point, which is five point five, now we start rounding up, right?
That's the fourth one one two three fourth one.
It rounds up to six.
And so that's that's what it's doing.
I don't think any more explanation is needed beyond this.
All right.
And then we've got a square root function as well.
So we had the power function.
We have a square root function.
So let's do something like the square root of 81.
There you go.
It's nine.
OK.
So just like a calculator?
All right.
And then finally, I'm going to show you that there are a couple of math constants on the math function,
as on on the math class as well.
And those two constants are math dot pi.
So the number PI, I don't know how many places this is, and I'm not going to count them, but there's
PI.
So sometimes you're doing trig or you're wanting to calculate the area of a circle or a cylinder or
something like that, and you need PI rather than having to go, look it up and then type it into a
variable as a constant somewhere.
They give you PI in the math class.
So there's PI.
And then the other number that you get as a constant is E, which is Euler's number 2.7, whatever.
So another very useful math constant.
And I think this is pretty much going to wrap up what we're going to learn in math.
I would encourage you, though, to open up your if you weren't following along with me, go to your
I.D. and do what I'm doing here.
Just type in math and then a period and then just look through all the functions because I did not cover
all of them.
There are so many mathematical functions on the math class that I have never used myself.
OK?
And by the way, you may have seen me do this a little bit, but I may not have explicitly called it
out.
If you want to understand more about anything, any function, not just on the math class, but anywhere
but anywhere at all type math dot and then you can scroll through and look for functions that you might
want to use or that you're just curious about.
And then you can select one.
OK.
Like so.
And then if you put your cursor anywhere on the name of that method and hit the F1 key or control Q
on Windows and Linux, you'll get a little documentation for that.
Now here I need to pick which overloaded version of the same function I want.
There's one that takes a floating and there's one that takes a double.
So I'll take the float one.
And now when I click on that, I get a little bit of documentation about that function so that I or
that.
Well, now you hearing me calling these functions because now we're talking about math functions, but
technically they are methods in Java still.
All right.
So and then you can read here a little description of what this particular method or function is doing
returns the unbiased exponent used in the representation of a float.
OK.
All right.
That's going to wrap up our whirlwind tour of the math functions.